The Use of Data Mining for Basketball Matches 
Outcomes Prediction 
 
Dragan Miljkovi ć, Lj ubiša Gajić, Aleksandar Kova čević, Zora Konjovi ć 
 Faculty of Technical Sciences, Novi Sad, Republic of Serbia 
dr
amilj@hotmail.com , ljubisa_gajic@yahoo.com , kocha78@uns.ac.rs , ftn_zora@uns.ac.rs   
 
 
 
Abstract — Sport result prediction is nowadays very 
popular among fans around the world, which particularly 
contributed to the expansion of sports betting. This makes 
the problem of predicting the results of sporting events, a 
new and interesting challenge. Consequently systems 
dealing with this problem are developed every day. This 
paper presents one such system, which uses data mining 
techniques in order to predict the outcomes of basketball 
games in NBA (National Basketball Association) league. The 
problem of predicting the game result is formalized as a 
classification problem, where the Naive Bayes method is 
used. Besides actual result, for each game system calculates 
the spread, by using multivariate linear regression. The 
MVC Model 2 pattern based software system is 
implemented. The system was evaluated on the dataset 
comprising 778 games from the regular part of the 
2009/2010 NBA season and it correctly predicted the 
winners of about 67% of matches. 
I. INTRODUCTION  
Sp
ort result prediction is nowadays very popular among 
fans around the world, which is particularly contributed to 
the expansion of sports betting. This is particularly evident 
for the most popular sports such as football and 
basketball. Many people have developed various systems 
with the aim of providing the best possible prediction of 
the winners of sporting events. The main problems with 
such systems are that users are often swayed by emotions 
or the systems do not work with the right set of data. One 
approach to this prediction problem is the use of data 
mining techniques, which will be demonstrated in this 
paper. This paper presents a system which predicts the 
outcomes and calculates the spread of NBA games. 
Prediction problem is formalized as a problem of 
classification, while for the calculation of the spread 
multivariate linear regression is used. Several 
classification methods were tested and among them, Naive 
Bayes method is selected because it provided the best 
results during testing phase. The system was evaluated on 
the collection of 778 games from 2009/2010 season and 
system has correctly predicted the winners of about 67% 
of matches.  
The rest of the paper is organized in five sections 
describing related work, the problem and solution method, 
software implementation, system’s evaluation and 
prediction results, and concluding remarks. 
II. RELATED WORK  
Th
ere are many papers dealing with the topic of 
predicting the results of sports events, and most of them are related to football. A variety of techniques are used, 
ranging from data mining to statistical methods. In [1] 
authors present the approach for predicting the results of 
football matches called FRES (Football Result Expert 
System). A combination of Bayes inference and rule-
based reasoning is used.  Each game is represented as a 
series of tides (flows). Probabilities of some events, like 
possible player substitute or change of formation, are 
calculated on the basis of previous data in each tide and 
are used to fire certain rules to determine the decisions for 
the next tide. The system was applied to the FIFA World 
Cup 2002 matches and it correctly predicted the champion 
and runner-up, and also 6 of 8 participants in the quarter-
finals.  
A common approach to this subject matter is also the 
use of artificial neural networks, which can be seen in [2] 
and [3]. The idea behind these works is the use of a 
number of statistical data to train the neural network 
(multi-layer perceptron in most of the cases). The system 
presented in [3] is evaluated in the international 
competition in result predictions - Top Tipper [4] and 
proved to be satisfactory by comparing it with other 
competitors. Average percentage of correct predictions for 
ranged from 54.6% for English Football Premier League 
to 67.5% of Super Rugby.  
Naive Bayes classifiers are used to predict the Cy 
Young Award winners in American baseball in [5]. In the 
period since 1967 to 2006 this system successfully 
predicted over 80% of the prize winners.  
A form of Elo rating system [6], modified is such way 
that to allow “home ground advantage”, is used in [7] for 
generating prediction probabilities. The Minimum 
Message Length [8] is used as a parameter estimation 
technique.  
In the basketball domain, data mining techniques are 
mostly used for purposes other than the prediction of 
match outcomes. Authors in [9] describe a system based 
on the statistical data and fuzzy evaluation which provides 
a performance evaluation of players and can also predict 
their performances in the upcoming matches. A solution 
for supporting the basketball coaches in making 
tactical/technical decisions during matches and also for 
pre-game and post-game analysis is presented in [10]. The 
system is based on the use of apriori algorithm and is 
tested on data from the Italian first division.  
Lately a lot of work is done on the subject of processing 
and extracting relevant information from the video clips of 
sports matches. Solutions that address this topic are 
described in [11] and [12].  
 
- 309 -
SISY 2010 • 2010 IEEE 8th International Symposium on Intelligent Systems and Informatics • September 10-11, 2010, Subotica, Serbia
978-1-4244-7395-3/10/$26.00 ©2010 IEEE
 
Figure 1. Database schema III. THE PROBLEM AND THE SOLUTION  
T
he problem intended to be solved by the software 
proposed in this paper is the following one: predicting the 
outcomes of the NBA matches and calculating the spread 
for NBA games.    
The outcome predicting problem is formalized as a 
classification problem, where the match outcomes belong 
to exactly one of the two categories (classes): those in 
which the host will win and those in which the visiting 
team will take the victory (unlike some other sports, in 
basketball there is no draws and teams are forced to play 
extra time until there a winner is determined). 
Spread (which is used only in the sports betting) 
represents an advantage in the number of points given to 
one of the teams in order to equalize their chances for 
victory in the eyes of bookmakers. 
Each game is described with record consisting of 141 
attributes, which are related to the outcome of the match, 
and the participating teams. For each team there are 2 
groups of attributes. 
The first group consists of standard basketball statistics 
(field goals made, field goals attempted, 3 pointers, free 
throws, rebounds, blocked shots, fouls, etc). The attributes 
in the second group are composed of the information 
about league standings (number of wins and loses, home 
and away wins, current streak etc). For the first attribute 
group overall statistics are taken into account, as well as 
those from home games and those from away 
matches. Complete statistics attribute set with descriptions 
can be seen in Table I, while standings attribute set is 
described in Table II.  
Multivariate linear regression is used for calculation of 
the spread for NBA games where the point difference was 
used as a target variable, while all other attributes were 
used as explanatory variables. 
TABLE I.   
STATISTIC ATTRIBUTE  SET  
A
ttribute Description 
FGM Field goal made per game 
FGA Field goal attempted per game 
FGP Field goal percentage per game 
3M 3-pointers made per game 
3A 3-pointers attempted per game 
3P 3-pointers percentage per game 
FTM Free throws made per game 
FTA Free throws attempted per game 
FTP Free throws percentage per game 
OR Offensive rebounds per game 
DR Defensive rebounds per game 
TR Total rebounds per game 
AS Assists per game 
TO Turnovers per game 
ST Steals per game 
BL Blocks per game 
F Fouls per game 
P Points per game 
 
 
 TABLE II.   
STANDINGS ATTRIBUTE  SET  
A
ttribute Description 
Won Total number of wins 
Lost Total number of losses 
Pct Percent of wins 
Homewon Number of games won at home 
Homelost Number of games lost at home 
Roadwon Number of games won away 
Roadlost Number of games lost away 
Divwon Number of games won in division 
Divlost Number of games lost in division 
Confwon Number of games won in conference 
Conflost Number of games lost in conference 
Streak Number of consecutive wins/losses 
L10won Number of wins in last 10 games 
L10lost Number of losses in last 10 games 
 
In order to improve the performance of the 
classification in the system, feature selection and 
normalization were used. Experiments were carried out 
with the variety of classification techniques: decision 
trees, k nearest neighbors, Naive Bayes and support vector 
machines. The best results were obtained by the Naive 
Bayes classifier combined with normalization and feature 
selection.  
 
IV. SOFTWARE IMPLEMENTATION  
F
or development of a classification and regression 
models that are used in the system, RapidMiner [15] was 
selected as a tool. Also, RapidMiner’s implementation of 
naive Bayes method and multivariate linear regression are 
used in application itself in the form of Java libraries.  
All data used in this software are stored in MySQL 
relational database and accessed using JDBC (Java 
Database Connectivity) drivers. Database schema can be 
seen in Figure 1. 
The complete system for result prediction was 
implemented in Java programming language using MVC 
Model 2 pattern [16] based on the synchronous work of 
three components: the model, visualization layer and 
controller. Figure 2 shows these components and how they 
interact together.  
 
 
D. Miljkovic et al. • The Use of Data Mining for Basketball Matches Outcomes Prediction
- 310 -
 
Figure 3.  UML Activity diagram 
 
Figure 4. Home page 
 
Figure 5. Statistics page 
 
Figure 2. MVC Model 2 pattern 
 
T
he model component models data and processes. This 
component interacts with the database and executes 
operations over data. Entity JavaBeans components, Java 
classes mapped to a corresponding table in relational 
database are used as model. For communication with the 
database there are Controller Helper components, 
including Session Enterprise JavaBeans classes and DAO 
(Data Access Object).  
The view component (visualization layer) visualizes 
data provided by the model component. JSP (Java Server 
Pages) with JSTL (Java Server Pages Standard Tag 
Library), EL (Expression Language) and JavaScript is 
used in this software.  
The controller manages the visualization layer and the 
model. All user actions go through this component which 
makes the decision on which application part will be 
executed and displayed. The roles of controller in this 
application perform servlets, more specifically Java 
Servlet classes.   
The activity diagram is displayed on Figure 3. 
 From the Figure 3 one can see that the application 
operates in the following manner: 
/square4 Fresh information about the games that were 
played previous day, as well as new statistical data 
for all teams are downloaded. 
/square4 Based on these data and prediction models the 
system calculates the predictions for future games 
in the form of probabilities (for each team the 
likelihoods of winning a match are given). 
 
The application allows user to view predictions for the 
upcoming matches, as well as the results of games 
already played and previous predictions. Some 
screenshots can be seen in Figures 4 and 5. 
 
 
 
V. EVALUATION AND RESULTS  
 
In order to evaluate the system, the statistical data of 
games that have already been played during a 2009/2010 
season were used. The dataset consists of 778 games. All 
data were collected from the official NBA website [13] 
and part of the Yahoo website dedicated to NBA league 
[14]. One example from the dataset is given in Table III. 
This example represents the game between Sacramento 
Kings and Houston Rockets, played at April 12th, 2010 in 
S
acramento, California. 
K fold cross-validation was used for evaluation of the 
system. In this validation method the dataset is divided 
into k subsets and each of them exactly once used as a test 
set, and in other k-1 iterations as a training set. 10 fold 
cross-validation was used. Accuracy was used as the 
- 311 -
SISY 2010 • 2010 IEEE 8th International Symposium on Intelligent Systems and Informatics • September 10-11, 2010, Subotica, Serbia
performance measure, and it is calculated by the following 
formula: 
 
accuracy =number of correct predictions
total number ofpredictions   (1) 
                           
T
ABLE III.  DATASET EXAMPLE   
A
ttribute Sacramento Kings Houston Rockets 
Won 25 42 
Lost 55 39 
Pct 0.313 0.519 
Homewon 18 23 
Homelost 22 18 
Roadwon 7 18 
Roadlost 33 22 
Divwon 5 9 
Divlost 10 7 
Confwon 16 27 
Conflost 34 24 
Streak -1 -1 
L10won 1 5 
L10lost 9 5 
FGM 38.3 37.7 
FGA 84.1 84.4 
FGP 45.6 44.7 
3M 5.9 7.9 
3A 16.9 22.4 
3P 34.9 35.2 
FTM 17.4 19.0 
FTA 24.0 24.7 
FTP 72.6 77.2 
OR 11.9 11.8 
DR 30.7 30.1 
TR 42.6 42.0 
AS 20.5 21.8 
TO 14.2 13.8 
ST 6.9 7.1 
BL 4.5 3.9 
F 22.3 20.9 
P 100.0 102.4 
Winning 
probabilities 42.8 57.2 
Actual result 107 117 
 
The system’s achieved accuracy was of 67%, which 
means that it successfully predicted the outcome of more 
than two-thirds of the games in that period (a total of 778 
games). This can be considered a very good result by 
comparing it with other systems.  For example, sports 
journalists from CBS had the percentage accuracy of 
68.3% in the previous season [17]. The overall results in 
terms of precision and recall are given in Table IV. 
 
TABLE IV.   
CONFUSION MATRIX 
P
redictions  Home win Away win Recall 
Home win 354 100 77,97% Actual 
results Away win 156 168 51,85% 
Precision 86,34% 62,69%  
 
 As for the prediction of spread, the system has 
successfully provided predictions for 78 of 778 matches 
(~ 10%), which is the expected result, because it is very 
hard to predict the exact difference in which basketball 
game ends and the goal of this attempt was to provide 
only approximate information on the possible difference. 
 
VI. CONCLUSION  
T
his paper presents a system for predicting the 
outcomes of NBA league matches. The application 
provides predictions about the winner of the match (home 
or visiting team) and the value of spread for the match. 
Naive Bayes classification method and multivariate linear 
regression were used to perform these tasks. The achieved 
results are satisfactory and in line with expectations.  
Future plans include experimenting with the system by 
applying it to other sports domains such as various 
football competitions, American football, hockey etc. and 
also experiments with some other methods of 
classification, such as neural networks. . 
REFERENCES  
[1] B yongho Min, Jinhyuck Kim, Chonghyoun Choe, Hyeonsang 
Eon, Robert Ian (Bob) McKay, “A Compound Framework for 
Sports Prediction: The Case Study of Football”, Knowledge-Based 
Systems , vol. 21, issue 7, October 2008, pp. 551-562, Elsevier 
Science Publishers B. V.  Amsterdam, The Netherlands   
[2] M ichael Baulch, “Using Machine Learning to Predict the Results 
of Sporting Matches”, Department of Computer Science and 
Electrical Engineering, University of Queensland 
[3] Alan McCabe, Jarrod Trevathan, “Artificial Intelligence in Sports 
Prediction”, Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on 
Information Technology: New Generations , 2008, pp. 1194-1197, 
IEEE Computer Society 
[4] http://www.toptipper.com  
[5] Lloyd Smith, Bret Lipscomb, Adam Simkins, “Data Mining in 
Sports: Predicting Cy Young Award Winners”, Journal of 
Computing Sciences in Colleges, vol. 22, issue 4, April 2007, pp. 
115-121, Consortium for Computing Sciences in Colleges  
[6] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elo_rating_system   
[7] Ryan Baird, “Probabilistic Sports Prediction Using Machine 
Learning Honors Thesis”, School of Computer Science and 
Software Engineering, Monash University, Clayton, Vic.  
[8] http://www.csse.monash.edu.au/~lloyd/tildeMML/   
[9] Mourad Atlas, Yan-Qing Zhang, “Fuzzy Neural Agents for Online 
NBA Scouting”, Proceedings of the 2004 IEEE/WIC/ACM 
International Conference on Web Intelligence, pp. 58-63, IEEE 
Computer Society 
[10] Guiseppe Polese, Massimiliano Troiano, Genoveffa Tortora,  “A 
Data Mining Based System Supporting Tactical Decisions”, SEKE 
'02: Proceedings of the 14th international conference on Software 
engineering and knowledge engineering, 2002, pp. 681-684, ACM  
[11] Sebastian Lühr, Mihai Lazarescu, “A Visual Data Analysis Tool 
for Sport Player Performance Benchmarking, Comparison and 
Change Detection”, Proceedings of the 19th IEEE International 
Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence , vol. 01, 2007, pp. 
289-296, IEEE Computer Society 
[12] Lawrence Y. Deng, Yi-Jen Liu, “Semantic Analysis and Video 
Event Mining in Sports Video”, Proceedings of the 22nd 
International Conference on Advanced Information Networking 
and Applications – Workshops , 2008, pp. 1517-1522, IEEE 
Computer Society 
[13] http://www.nba.com  
[14] http://sports.yahoo.com/nba  
[15] http://www.rapid-i.com/  
[16] Branko Milosavljevi ć, Milan Vidakovi ć, „Java i internet 
programiranje”,  2007, FTN Izdavaštvo, Novi Sad  
[17] h ttp://www.cbssports.com/nba/exclus1ives  
D. Miljkovic et al. • The Use of Data Mining for Basketball Matches Outcomes Prediction
- 312 -
